Hello, in this section I'm going
to introduce the important idea
of a term-document matrix, but
also I'm going to explain why it
isn't actually a practical data structure
for an informational retrieval system.
We'll take as our example doing
information retrieval over the works of
William Shakespeare.
So let's suppose we have
this concrete question.
Which plays of Shakespeare
contain the words Brutus and
Caesar, but not Calpurnia.
Well, if you're starting from a very
basic level of text searching commands
the first think that you'd think
about to solve this problem is by
using searching through the text
of the documented source and
play, what's known in
the Unix world as grepping.
And so, we could first of all grep for
plays that contain Brutus and
Caesar and then if you know your grep
command well you can give a flag for
files that do not match, and you could get
out the ones that don't contain Calpurnia.
Now these days for works of
the size of William Shakespeare for
this kind of query, grepping is
a perfectly satisfactory solution.
Now destrives and
computers are sufficiently
fast that you could use this method and it
takes no time at all to find the answer.
But nevertheless,
that isn't a good answer for
the full information retrieval problem.
It falls flat in a number of ways.
Once your corpus becomes large,
hence that means something
like everything on your hard disk or
even more so, the world wide web, we can't
afford to do a linear scan through all
that documents every time we have a query.
Then some parts for like the not part
become less trivial to implement
than just finding things.
But even more so than the not part, we'll
have more complex queries, like finding
uses of the word Romans near countrymen,
and we can't do that with a grep command.
But, even more than that, the big thing
that's happened in information retrieval
is the idea of making,
finding the best documents to return for
a query, and
that's something that we just can't get
out of the linear scan model
while finding things that match.
And we'll talk about all of these issues
and the way they're handled in modern
information retrieval
systems in later lectures.
But let's first go to this idea
of a term-document matrix.
So what we do in a term-document
matrix is that we have
the rows of the matrix are our words,
or often they're also called
an information retrieval of the terms.
And then the columns of
the matrix are our documents.
And we're doing here is
a very simple thing.
We're simply saying, let's fill in
every cell in this boolean matrix,
like whether the word
appears in the play or not.
So Anthony, appears in Anthony and
Cleopatra, but
Calpurnia does not appear in Anthony and
Cleopatra.
So this matrix represents
the appearance of words in documents.
And if we have this matrix, it's straight
forward to then answer boolean queries,
such as our example before.
Before queries for documents that contain
Brutus and Caesar, but not Calpurnia.
Let's just go through
concretely how we do that.
So, what we're going to do is we're
going to take the vectors for the term
in the query, and then we're going to put
them together with boolean operations.
So first of all, we can take out
the row that is referring to Brutus.
It goes up here.
Then, we can take the row for
Caesar and it there.
And then finally, we can take the row for
Calpurnia, complement it and
then stick it down here.
So Calpurnia only appears in
Julius Caesar and so, we complemented
it to a vector where everything is one and
apart from Julius Caesar.
And at that point we can just and those
three vectors together and the answer is.
This 1 of 100100.
And so we've been able to do information
retrieval successfully, and can tell that
this query is satisfied by the documents,
Antony and Cleopatra and Hamlet.
And indeed, we can then go off
to the document collection and
confirm that that is the case.
So here we are, so in Antony and
Cleopatra, when Antony found Julius Caesar
dead, he cried almost roaring and
he wept when at Philippi Brutus is slain.
And similarly we find both
words occurring in Hamlet.
Okay, so that's the suggests that
we could do information retrieval
simply by working with
this term document matrix.
So an important thing to realize
is that doesn't really work
once we go to sensible size collections.
And so let's just go through that for
a minute.
Let's go through a sensible sized,
but still small collection.
So, suppose that we have 1 million
documents, and we'll often use N to refer
to the number of documents, each of
which is on average 1,000 words long.
Okay, so what does that mean
in terms of the size of our
document collection and
in terms of the size of our matrix.
So, if we have an average of six
bytes per word including spaces and
punctuation the amount of data we're
talking about here is six gigabytes.
So that a tiny fraction of one,
one hard disk in your laptop.
But, let us then suppose,
we try and work out how many
distinct terms there are in
our document collection.
And we need to know
the number of distinct terms,
because that corresponds to
the number of columns now matrix.
And let's suppose they're about 500k,
that'll be a typical number for
a million documents.
So often refer to this number
of different terms as M.
Well what does that mean?
Well what it means is that even with that
size document collection we can't build
this term document matrix because we'll
have 500,000 rows and a million columns.
And that's half a trillion 0's and 1's.
It's already huge, and probably
bigger than we have space to store.
And as the document collection gets
bigger than a million documents,
things are just going to get worse.
But there's this really important
observation, which is although
the matrix here had half
a trillion 0's and 1's are that,
that actually almost all
of the entries are 0.
But the document has at
most one billion 1's.
And it'd be good for
you guys just stop and think for
a fraction of a second why is it that
there's at most one billion ones.
And the answer to that is well,
if we have 1M documents,
and the average document Is 1,000
words long, as we said last time,
then the actual number of word
tokens is only one billion.
So even if we assume that every word
in every document were different,
we could only have, at most,
one billion 1 entries.
And most likely, we have far less than
that because we'll have common words like
there, are, of and to occurring many many
times in each document and so, therefore
the key observation is the matrix we are
dealing with is very, very, very sparse.
So the central question in
the design of information retrieval
data structures is taking
advantage of that sparsity and
coming up with a better
data representation.
And the secret of doing that and having an
efficient storage mechanism is we want to
only record the positions that hold a one
and not the positions that hold a zero.
Okay, so I have given you an understanding
of the term document matrix.
It is an important
conceptual data structure
that we keep on coming back to again and
again.
When we talk about various types of
algorithms, we think about them in terms
of that matrix as you will see, but
when we actually come to doing storage in
computer systems we can also see
that we never actually want to store
documents and the information
retrieval representation in that form.